# Query languages for data

---

## Declarative and Imperative query language

- SQL is a declarative query language.
- In an imperative language, you tell the computer to perform certain operations in order.
- In a declarative query language you just specify the pattern of the data you want, but not how to achieve that goal.
- A declarative query language hides implementation details of the database engine, making it possible for the database
  system to introduce performance improvements without requiring any changes to queries.
- Declarative languages often lend themselves to parallel execution
- while imperative code is very hard to parallelise across multiple cores because it specifies instructions that must be
  performed in a particular order.
- Declarative languages specify only the pattern of the results, not the algorithm that is used to determine results.

## Declarative queries on the web

- In a web browser, using declarative CSS styling is much better than manipulating styles imperatively in JavaScript.
- Declarative languages like SQL turned out to be much better than imperative query APIs.

---

## MapReduce querying

- MapReduce is a programming model for processing large amounts of data in bulk across many machines, popularised by
  Google.
- Mongo offers a MapReduce solution.

```shell
db.observations.mapReduce(
    function map() { 2
        var year  = this.observationTimestamp.getFullYear();
        var month = this.observationTimestamp.getMonth() + 1;
        emit(year + "-" + month, this.numAnimals); 3
    },
    function reduce(key, values) { 4
        return Array.sum(values); 5
    },
    {
        query: { family: "Sharks" }, 1
        out: "monthlySharkReport" 6
    }
);
```

In above example:

- The filter to consider only shark (1)
- Map function is called once for every document that matches query (2)
- map emits a key and value (date, numofanimals) (3)
- key-value pair emited by map are grouped by key, for all pair with same key reduce function will be called once (4)
- reduce function sums the num of animals (5)
- Final output is written to the collection monthlySharkReport  (6)

Note:

- The map and reduce functions must be pure functions
- they cannot perform additional database queries and they must not have any side effects.
- These restrictions allow the database to run the functions anywhere, in any order, and rerun them on failure.

## Mongo aggregation pipeline

- A usability problem with MapReduce is that you have to write two carefully coordinated functions.
- A declarative language offers more opportunities for a query optimiser to improve the performance of a query.
- For there reasons, MongoDB 2.2 added support for a declarative query language called aggregation pipeline

```shell
db.observations.aggregate([
    { $match: { family: "Sharks" } },
    { $group: {
        _id: {
            year:  { $year:  "$observationTimestamp" },
            month: { $month: "$observationTimestamp" }
        },
        totalAnimals: { $sum: "$numAnimals" }
    } }
]);
```

---

## Graph-like data models

- If many-to-many relationships are very common in your application, it becomes more natural to start modelling your
  data as a graph.
- A graph consists of vertices (nodes or entities) and edges (relationships or arcs).
- Well-known algorithms can operate on these graphs, like the shortest path between two points, or popularity of a web
  page.
- There are several ways of structuring and querying the data.
    - **The property graph model** (implemented by Neo4j, Titan, and Infinite Graph)
    - **the triple-store model** (implemented by Datomic, AllegroGraph, and others).
- There are also three declarative query languages for graphs: **Cypher, SPARQL, and Datalog.**

### Property graphs

- Each vertex consists of:
    - Unique identifier
    - Outgoing edges
    - Incoming edges
    - Collection of properties (key-value pairs)
- Each edge consists of:
    - Unique identifier
    - Vertex at which the edge starts (tail vertex)
    - Vertex at which the edge ends (head vertex)
    - Label to describe the kind of relationship between the two vertices
    - A collection of properties (key-value pairs)

- Graphs provide a great deal of flexibility for data modelling. Graphs are good for evolvability.

- **Cypher** is a declarative language for property graphs created by **Neo4j**

### Triple-stores and SPARQL

- In a triple-store, all information is stored in the form of very simple three-part statements: subject, predicate,
  object (peg: Jim, likes, bananas).
- A triple is equivalent to a vertex in graph.

**The SPARQL query language**

- SPARQL is a query language for triple-stores using the RDF data model.

### The foundation: Datalog

- Datalog provides the foundation that later query languages build upon.
- Its model is similar to the triple-store model, generalised a bit.
- Instead of writing a triple (subject, predicate, object), we write as predicate(subject, object).
- We define rules that tell the database about new predicates and rules can refer to other rules, just like functions
  can call other functions or recursively call themselves.
- Rules can be combined and reused in different queries. It's less convenient for simple one-off queries, but it can
  cope better if your data is complex.